Document cross-namespace waypoints (#15649)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ambient/usage/waypoint/index.md

For instance, traffic which is addressed to a service, even though ultimately resolved to a pod IP, is always treated by the ambient mesh as to-service and would use a service-attached waypoint.
{{< /tip >}}

## Cross-namespace waypoint use {#usewaypointnamespace}

Straight our of the box a waypoint proxy is usable by resources within the same namespace. Beginning with Istio 1.23 it is possible to use waypoints in different namespaces. In this section we will examine the gateway configuration required to enable cross-namespace use as well as how to configure your resources to use a waypoint from a different namespace.

### Configure a waypoint for cross-namespace use

> In order to enable cross-namespace use of a waypoint the `Gateway` should be configured to [allow routes](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io%2fv1.AllowedRoutes) from other namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to enable cross-namespace use of a waypoint, the `Gateway` should be configured to [allow routes](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io%2fv1.AllowedRoutes) from other namespaces.
```

{{< tip >}}
The keyword, `All`, may be specified as the value for `allowedRoutes.namespaces.from` in order to allow routes from any namespace.
{{< /tip >}}

The following Gateway would allow resources in a namespace called "cross-namespace-waypoint-consumer" to use this egress-gateway:

{{< text syntax=yaml >}}
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: egress-gateway
  namespace: common-infrastructure
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Selector
        selector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: cross-namespace-waypoint-consumer
{{< /text >}}

### Configure resources to use a cross-namespace waypoint proxy

> By default the Istio control plane will look for a waypoint specified using the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label in the same namespace as the resource which the label is applied to. It is possible to use a waypoint in another namespace by adding a new label, `istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace`. These two labels are used together to specify the name and namespace of your waypoint respectively. For example, to configure a ServiceEntry called "istio-site" to use a waypoint called "egress-gateway" in the namespace called "common-infrastructure" you could use the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the Istio control plane will look for a waypoint specified using the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label in the same namespace as the resource which the label is applied to. It is possible to use
a waypoint in another namespace by adding a new label, `istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace`. These two labels are used together to specify the name and namespace of your waypoint respectively.
For example, to configure a `ServiceEntry` called "istio-site" to use a waypoint called "egress-gateway" in the namespace called "common-infrastructure" you could use the following commands:
```

{{< text syntax=bash >}}
$ kubectl label serviceentries.networking.istio.io istio-site istio.io/use-waypoint=egress-gateway
serviceentries.networking.istio.io/istio-site labeled
$ kubectl label serviceentries.networking.istio.io istio-site istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace=common-infrastructure

> serviceentries.networking.istio.io/istio-site labeled

Reviewer 2: If the namespace where the SE is in already has the use-waypoint and use-waypoint-namespace labels, then no need to label the SE, correct?

Author: yeah, "use-waypoint-namespace" is supported on all resources which support "use-waypoint". Probably should be clarified in the doc though, ty

Author: added some verbiage to clarify. ptal when you have a chance and let me know if you think it does the trick.

For instance, traffic which is addressed to a service, even though ultimately resolved to a pod IP, is always treated by the ambient mesh as to-service and would use a service-attached waypoint.
{{< /tip >}}

## Cross-namespace waypoint use {#usewaypointnamespace}

> Straight our of the box a waypoint proxy is usable by resources within the same namespace. Beginning with Istio 1.23 it is possible to use waypoints in different namespaces. In this section we will examine the gateway configuration required to enable cross-namespace use as well as how to configure your resources to use a waypoint from a different namespace.

Author: Good catch. TY!

> Straight out of the box a waypoint proxy is usable by resources within the same namespace. Beginning with Istio 1.23 it is possible to use waypoints in different namespaces. In this section we will examine the gateway configuration required to enable cross-namespace use as well as how to configure your resources to use a waypoint from a different namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Straight out of the box, a waypoint proxy is usable by resources within the same namespace. Beginning with Istio 1.23, it is possible to use waypoints in different namespaces. In this section, we will examine
the gateway configuration required to enable cross-namespace use and how to configure your resources to use a waypoint from a different namespace.
```

### Configure a waypoint for cross-namespace use

In order to enable cross-namespace use of a waypoint, the `Gateway` should be configured to [allow routes](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io%2fv1.AllowedRoutes) from other namespaces.

{{< tip >}}

> The keyword, `All`, may be specified as the value for `allowedRoutes.namespaces.from` in order to allow routes from any namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The keyword `All` may be specified as the value for `allowedRoutes.namespaces.from` in order to allow routes from any namespace.
```

{{< /tip >}}

> The following Gateway would allow resources in a namespace called "cross-namespace-waypoint-consumer" to use this egress-gateway:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following `Gateway` would allow resources in a namespace called "cross-namespace-waypoint-consumer" to use this `egress-gateway`:
```

Author: `Gateway` makes sense to me but `egress-gateway` is not a resource type or primitive it's just a name. Would this be double-quoted instead of getting back-ticks?

Author: nm, we basically never make a distinction like that elsewhere

{{< text syntax=yaml >}}
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: egress-gateway
  namespace: common-infrastructure
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Selector
        selector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: cross-namespace-waypoint-consumer
{{< /text >}}

### Configure resources to use a cross-namespace waypoint proxy

By default, the Istio control plane will look for a waypoint specified using the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label in the same namespace as the resource which the label is applied to. It is possible to use
a waypoint in another namespace by adding a new label, `istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace`. `istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace` works for all resources which support the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label.

> Together, the two labels specify the name and namespace of your waypoint respectively. For example, to configure a ServiceEntry called "istio-site" to use a waypoint called "egress-gateway" in the namespace
> called "common-infrastructure" you could use the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Together, the two labels specify the name and namespace of your waypoint respectively. For example, to configure a `ServiceEntry` named `istio-site` to use a waypoint named `egress-gateway` in the namespace
named `common-infrastructure`, you could use the following commands:
```

Author: same things here, `ServiceEntry` is a kind of resource so back ticks make sense. Seems like the others should just be double quotes though

Author: nm, we basically never make a distinction like that elsewhere
